---
title: Fowl's Journal - 2/1/2021
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-01-03T23:26:50.156Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-01-03T09:08:37.313Z
---

# 3/1/2021

## Daily Goals 
10/50 Pull-ups
40/200 Squats
0/200 Hip Raises 
80/200 Push-ups
70/150 Crunches 
1/4 Writing Pomodoros
2/8 University Pomodoros
3/2 Work Pomodoros
0/4 IR and reps Pomodoros

> Start time: around 10 
{.is-info}

## Daily objectives
The main problem in my schedule is represented by external interference and downtime.
That external interference with my schedule (e.g. family gathering) bothers me so much is probably a problem in my flexibility. The quick solution would be adjusting my daily activities in a way that they can be moved around without causing a major disruption. 
The immovable nature of my computer is also a problem when I start getting tired. Ideally some of the pomodoros on top should be doable whily lying down. 
Downtime after lunch clearly indicates that I should be eating way less at that our and probably adopt a protein+fat meal instead of mainly carbs (e.g. pasta). 
Feeling tired at night but not being able to sleep means that there is a two to four hours slot of maximum inefficiency at night. Solutions? Using a laptop to write or do reps has not worked that well in the past, but it's worth exploring that option again. Creating Anki cards on the phone or writing on the phone? Probably easier but high risk of me simply reading a book instead of doing that. 






## Comments
Joining mundane acts of conversation and, more in general, socializing puts forth the basis of a framework to evade an ordinary life. Through ordinary acts and sights, one can generate a beautiful deviation; however, the uniqueness of a moment only lies in one's head. There's a lot to be said about avoiding family and social gatherings: they are dreaded by the self-appointed productive people. After reading a lot of Robert Boice, I feel like weak ties to the real world are more important than we may think. Instead of avoiding some trivial night out, it's, in my books, more productive to plan around it. 
Fueling your own work through a process is what makes it great and reliable. There can be greatness without reliability, but no balance and long term plans. It's fun to me how working without the notion of "not having time",therefore hurrying, is what makes the difference between productiveness and unproductiveness. 
Conversations of different quality affect us in different ways, but pawning off weak conversations may not be the best way around them; instead, using them as a compass to what we should do about them and what we should avoid for ourselves may prove as the most insightful choice of our life. 
Haughty people disregard the value of simplicity or sneer with distaste in front of greatness; weak souls will always try to stay in their pond, whether the others are going straight toward their goals or going through an sea-splitting thunderstorm. 
Welcoming all kinds of words in our lap might change who we are, once we know how to cuddle them without giving in to their ruffianism. 







